Henry IV, Part I
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/henry-iv-part-1/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
KING HENRY IV, formerly Henry Bolingbroke
PRINCE HAL, Prince of Wales and heir to the throne (also called Harry and Harry Monmouth)
LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, younger son of King Henry
EARL OF WESTMORELAND
SIR WALTER BLUNT
HOTSPUR (Sir Henry, or Harry, Percy)
LADY PERCY (also called Kate)
EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND, Henry Percy, Hotspur's father
EARL OF WORCESTER, Thomas Percy, Hotspur's uncle
EDMUND MORTIMER, earl of March
LADY MORTIMER (also called "the Welsh lady")
OWEN GLENDOWER, a Welsh lord, father of Lady Mortimer
DOUGLAS (Archibald, earl of Douglas)
ARCHBISHOP (Richard Scroop, archbishop of York)
SIR MICHAEL, a priest or knight associated with the archbishop
SIR RICHARD VERNON, an English knight
SIR JOHN FALSTAFF
POINS (also called Edward, Yedward, and Ned)
BARDOLPH
PETO
GADSHILL, setter for the robbers
HOSTESS of the tavern (also called Mistress Quickly)
VINTNER, or keeper of the tavern
FRANCIS, an apprentice tapster
Carriers, Ostlers, Chamberlain, Travelers, Sheriff, Servants, Lords, Attendants, Messengers, Soldiers


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the King, Lord John of Lancaster, and the Earl
of Westmoreland, with others.]


KING
So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
To be commenced in strands afar remote.
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood.
No more shall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruise her flow'rets with the armed hoofs
Of hostile paces. Those opposed eyes,
Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
All of one nature, of one substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock
And furious close of civil butchery,
Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,
March all one way and be no more opposed
Against acquaintance, kindred, and allies.
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,
As far as to the sepulcher of Christ--
Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight--
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
Whose arms were molded in their mothers' womb
To chase these pagans in those holy fields
Over whose acres walked those blessed feet
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed
For our advantage on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go.
Therefor we meet not now. Then let me hear
Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,
What yesternight our council did decree
In forwarding this dear expedience.

WESTMORELAND
My liege, this haste was hot in question,
And many limits of the charge set down
But yesternight, when all athwart there came
A post from Wales loaden with heavy news,
Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
A thousand of his people butchered,
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
Such beastly shameless transformation
By those Welshwomen done, as may not be
Without much shame retold or spoken of.

KING
It seems then that the tidings of this broil
Brake off our business for the Holy Land.

WESTMORELAND
This matched with other did, my gracious lord.
For more uneven and unwelcome news
Came from the north, and thus it did import:
On Holy-rood Day the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald,
That ever valiant and approved Scot,
At Holmedon met, where they did spend
A sad and bloody hour--
As by discharge of their artillery
And shape of likelihood the news was told,
For he that brought them, in the very heat
And pride of their contention did take horse,
Uncertain of the issue any way.



PRINCE
Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you
This honorable bounty shall belong.
Go to the Douglas and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free.
His valors shown upon our crests today
Have taught us how to cherish such high deeds,
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.

LANCASTER
I thank your Grace for this high courtesy,
Which I shall give away immediately.

KING
Then this remains, that we divide our power.
You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland,
Towards York shall bend you with your dearest
speed
To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
Who, as we hear, are busily in arms.
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,
Meeting the check of such another day.
And since this business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.
[They exit.]
